ProRata: A quantitative proteomics program for accurate protein abundance ratio estimation with confidence interval evaluation.

The abundance ratio between the light and heavy isotopologues of an isotopically labeled peptide can be estimated from their selected ion chromatograms. However, quantitative shotgun proteomics measurements yield selected ion chromatograms at highly variable signal-to-noise ratios for tens of thousands of peptides. This challenge calls for algorithms that not only robustly estimate the abundance ratios of different peptides but also rigorously score each abundance ratio for the expected estimation bias and variability. Scoring of the abundance ratios, much like scoring of sequence assignment for tandem mass spectra by peptide identification algorithms, enables filtering of unreliable peptide quantification and use of formal statistical inference in the subsequent protein abundance ratio estimation. In this study, a parallel paired covariance algorithm is used for robust peak detection in selected ion chromatograms. A peak profile is generated for each peptide, which is a scatterplot of ion intensities measured for the two isotopologues within their chromatographic peaks. Principal component analysis of the peak profile is proposed to estimate the peptide abundance ratio and to score the estimation with the signal-to-noise ratio of the peak profile (profile signal-to-noise ratio). We demonstrate that the profile signal-to-noise ratio is inversely correlated with the variability and bias of peptide abundance ratio estimation.

A profile likelihood algorithm is proposed for quantitative shotgun proteomics to infer the abundance ratios of proteins from the abundance ratios of isotopically labeled peptides derived from proteolysis. Previously, we have shown that the estimation variability and bias of peptide abundance ratios can be predicted from their profile signal-to-noise ratios. Given multiple quantified peptides for a protein, the profile likelihood algorithm probabilistically weighs the peptide abundance ratios by their inferred estimation variability, accounts for their expected estimation bias, and suppresses contribution from outliers. This algorithm yields maximum likelihood point estimation and profile likelihood confidence interval estimation of protein abundance ratios. This point estimator is more accurate than an estimator based on the average of peptide abundance ratios. The confidence interval estimation provides an "error bar" for each protein abundance ratio that reflects its estimation precision and statistical uncertainty. The accuracy of the point estimation and the precision and confidence level of the interval estimation were benchmarked with standard mixtures of isotopically labeled proteomes. The profile likelihood algorithm was integrated into a quantitative proteomics program, called ProRata.